
Introduction to YARA & Sigma

YARA and Sigma are two essential tools used by SOC analysts to enhance their threat detection and incident response capabilities. They empower analysts with improved threat detection capabilities, efficient log analysis, malware detection and classification, IOC identification, collaboration, customization, and integration with existing security tools.

Both YARA and Sigma rules grant SOC analysts potent capabilities to detect and respond to security threats. YARA excels in file and memory analysis, as well as pattern matching, whereas Sigma is particularly adept at log analysis and SIEM systems.

These detection rules utilize conditional logic applied to logs or files. Analysts craft these rules to pinpoint suspicious activities in logs or match patterns in files. These rules are pivotal in making detections more straightforward to compose, and thus, they constitute a crucial element of an effective threat detection strategy. Both YARA and Sigma adhere to standard formats that facilitate the creation and sharing of detection rules within the cybersecurity community.
Importance of YARA and Sigma rules for SOC Analysts

Let's explore the key reasons why YARA and Sigma are invaluable for SOC analysts:

    Enhanced Threat Detection: YARA and Sigma rules allow SOC analysts to develop customized detection rules tailored to their unique environment and security needs. These rules empower analysts to discern patterns, behaviors, or indicators linked to security threats, thus enabling them to proactively detect and address potential incidents. Various Github repositories provide a wealth of examples of YARA and Sigma rules.
        YARA rules: https://github.com/Yara-Rules/rules/tree/master/malware, https://github.com/mikesxrs/Open-Source-YARA-rules/tree/master
        Sigma rules https://github.com/SigmaHQ/sigma/tree/master/rules, https://github.com/joesecurity/sigma-rules, https://github.com/mdecrevoisier/SIGMA-detection-rules
    Efficient Log Analysis: Sigma rules are essential for log analysis in a SOC setting. Utilizing Sigma rules, analysts can filter and correlate log data from disparate sources, concentrating on events pertinent to security monitoring. This minimizes irrelevant data and enables analysts to prioritize their investigative efforts, leading to more efficient and effective incident response. An open-source tool called Chainsaw can be used to apply Sigma rules to event log files.
    Collaboration and Standardization: YARA and Sigma offer standardized formats and rule structures, fostering collaboration among SOC analysts and tapping into the collective expertise of the broader cybersecurity community. This encourages knowledge sharing, the formulation of best practices, and keeps analysts abreast of cutting-edge threat intelligence and detection methodologies. For instance, "The DFIR Report" shares YARA and Sigma rules derived from their investigations.
        https://github.com/The-DFIR-Report/Yara-Rules
        https://github.com/The-DFIR-Report/Sigma-Rules
    Integration with Security Tools: YARA and Sigma rules can be integrated seamlessly with a plethora of security tools, including SIEM platforms, log analysis systems, and incident response platforms. This integration enables automation, correlation, and enrichment of security events, allowing SOC analysts to incorporate the rules into their existing security infrastructure. As an example, Uncoder.io facilitates the conversion of Sigma rules into tailor-made, performance-optimized queries ready for deployment in the chosen SIEM and XDR systems.
    Malware Detection and Classification: YARA rules are particularly useful for SOC analysts in pinpointing and classifying malware. Leveraging YARA rules, analysts can create specific patterns or signatures that correspond to known malware traits or behaviors. This aids in the prompt detection and mitigation of malware threats, bolstering the organization's overall security posture.
    Indicator of Compromise (IOC) Identification: Both YARA and Sigma rules empower SOC analysts to locate and identify IOCs, which are distinct artifacts or behaviors linked to security incidents or breaches. By embedding IOCs into their rules, analysts can swiftly detect and counter potential threats, thus mitigating the consequences of security incidents and curtailing the duration of attackers' presence within the network.



    Page 2
    YARA and YARA Rules

YARA and YARA Rules

YARA is a powerful pattern-matching tool and rule format used for identifying and classifying files based on specific patterns, characteristics, or content. SOC analysts commonly use YARA rules to detect and classify malware samples, suspicious files, or indicators of compromise (IOCs).

YARA rules are typically written in a rule syntax that defines the conditions and patterns to be matched within files. These rules can include various elements, such as strings, regular expressions, and Boolean logic operators, allowing analysts to create complex and precise detection rules. It's important to note that YARA rules can recognize both textual and binary patterns, and they can be applied to memory forensics activities as well.

When applied, YARA scans files or directories and matches them against the defined rules. If a file matches a specific pattern or condition, it can trigger an alert or warrant further examination as a potential security threat.

Image showing process of detecting malware: identify suspicious pattern, create YARA rule, and scan for similar malware.

YARA rules are especially useful for SOC analysts when analyzing malware samples, conducting forensic investigations, or performing threat hunting activities. The flexibility and extensibility of YARA make it a valuable tool in the cybersecurity community.
Usages of Yara

    Malware Detection and Classification: YARA is commonly used for detecting and identifying malware samples based on specific patterns, characteristics, or indicators. YARA rules can be created to match against known malware signatures, behaviors, or file properties, aiding in the identification of malicious files and potentially preventing further compromise. Within the scope of digital forensics, YARA can also identify suspicious or malicious patterns in captured memory images.
    File Analysis and Classification: YARA is valuable for analyzing and classifying files based on specific patterns or attributes. Analysts can create YARA rules to categorize files by different file formats or file type, version, metadata, packers or other characteristics. This capability is useful in forensic analysis, malware research, or identifying specific file types within large datasets.
    Indicator of Compromise (IOC) Detection: YARA can be employed to search for specific indicators of compromise (IOCs) within files or directories. By defining YARA rules that target specific IOC patterns, such as file names, registry keys, or network artifacts, security teams can identify potential security breaches or ongoing attacks.
    Community-driven Rule Sharing: With YARA, we have the ability to tap into a community that regularly contributes and shares their detection rules. This ensures that we constantly update and refine our detection mechanisms.
    Create Custom Security Solutions: By combining YARA rules with other techniques like static and dynamic analysis, sandboxing, and behavior monitoring, effective security solutions can be created.
    Custom Yara Signatures/Rules: YARA allows us to create custom rules tailored to our organization's specific needs and environment. By deploying these custom rules in our security infrastructure, such as antivirus or endpoint detection and response (EDR) solutions, we can enhance our defense capabilities. Custom YARA rules can help identify unique or targeted threats that are specific to our organization's assets, applications, or industry.
    Incident Response: YARA aids in incident response by enabling analysts to quickly search and analyze files or memory images for specific patterns or indicators. By applying YARA rules during the investigation process, analysts can identify relevant artifacts, determine the scope of an incident, and gather critical information to aid in remediation efforts.
    Proactive Threat Hunting: Instead of waiting for an alert, we can leverage YARA to perform proactive searches across our environments, searching for potential threats or remnants of past infections.

How Does YARA Work?

In summary, the YARA scan engine, equipped with YARA modules, scans a set of files by comparing their content against the patterns defined in a set of rules. When a file matches the patterns and conditions specified in a YARA rule, it is considered a detected file. This process allows analysts to efficiently identify files that exhibit specific behaviors or characteristics, aiding in malware detection, IOC identification, and threat hunting. This flow is demonstrated in the diagram below.

Image showing YARA malware detection process: identify suspicious patterns, create YARA rules, scan files, and detect matches using YARA scan engine.

In the above diagram, we can see that the YARA scan engine, using YARA modules, matches patterns defined in a set of rules against a set of files, resulting in the detection of files that meet the specified patterns and conditions. This is how YARA rules are helpful to identify threats. Let's understand this in more detail.

    Set of Rules (containing suspicious patterns): First of all, we have one or more YARA rules, which are created by security analysts. These rules define specific patterns, characteristics, or indicators that need to be matched within files. Rules can include strings, regular expressions, byte sequences, and other indicators of interest. The rules are typically stored in a YARA rule file format (e.g., .yara or .yar file) for easy management and reuse.
    Set of Files (for scanning): A set of files, such as executables, documents, or other binary or text-based files, are provided as input to the YARA scan engine. The files can be stored on a local disk, within a directory, or even within memory images or network traffic captures.
    YARA Scan Engine: The YARA scan engine is the core component responsible for performing the actual scanning and matching of files against the defined YARA rules. It utilizes YARA modules, which are sets of algorithms and techniques, to efficiently compare the content of files against the patterns specified in the rules.
    Scanning and Matching: The YARA scan engine iterates through each file in the set, one at a time. For each file, it analyzes the content byte by byte, looking for matches against the patterns defined in the YARA rules. The YARA scan engine uses various matching techniques, including string matching, regular expressions, and binary matching, to identify patterns and indicators within the files.
    Detection of Files: When a file matches the patterns and conditions specified in a YARA rule, it is considered a detected file. The YARA scan engine records information about the match, such as the matched rule, the file path, and the offset within the file where the match occurred and provides output indicating the detection, which can be further processed, logged, or used for subsequent actions.

YARA Rule Structure

Let's dive into the structure of a YARA rule. YARA rules consist of several components that define the conditions and patterns to be matched within files. An example of a YARA rule is as follows:
Code: yara

rule my_rule {

    meta:
        author = "Author Name"
        description = "example rule"
        hash = ""

    strings:
        $string1 = "test"
        $string2 = "rule"
        $string3 = "htb"

    condition:
        all of them
}

Each rule in YARA starts with the keyword rule followed by a rule identifier. Rule identifiers are case sensitive where the first character cannot be a digit, and cannot exceed 128 characters.

The following keywords are reserved and cannot be used as an identifier:

Image showing a table of YARA keywords including 'all', 'and', 'any', 'ascii', 'at', 'base64', 'condition', 'contains', 'endswith', 'entrypoint', 'false', 'filesize', 'for', 'global', 'import', 'int32', 'matches', 'meta', 'nocase', 'none', 'not', 'or', 'private', 'rule', 'startswith', 'strings', 'true', 'uint16', 'wide', 'xor', 'defined'.

Now, let's go over the YARA rule structure using a rule that identifies strings associated with the WannaCry ransomware as an example. The rule below instructs YARA to flag any file containing all three specified strings as Ransomware_WannaCry.
Code: yara

rule Ransomware_WannaCry {

    meta:
        author = "Madhukar Raina"
        version = "1.0"
        description = "Simple rule to detect strings from WannaCry ransomware"
        reference = "https://www.virustotal.com/gui/file/ed01ebfbc9eb5bbea545af4d01bf5f1071661840480439c6e5babe8e080e41aa/behavior"

    strings:
        $wannacry_payload_str1 = "tasksche.exe" fullword ascii
        $wannacry_payload_str2 = "www.iuqerfsodp9ifjaposdfjhgosurijfaewrwergwea.com" ascii
        $wannacry_payload_str3 = "mssecsvc.exe" fullword ascii

    condition:
        all of them
}

That's a basic structure of a YARA rule. It starts with a header containing metadata, followed by conditions that define the context of the files to be matched, and a body that specifies the patterns or indicators to be found. The use of metadata and tags helps in organizing and documenting the rules effectively.

YARA Rule Breakdown:

    Rule Header: The rule header provides metadata and identifies the rule. It typically includes:
        Rule name: A descriptive name for the rule.
        Rule tags: Optional tags or labels to categorize the rule.
        Rule metadata: Additional information such as author, description, and creation date.

    Example:
    Code: yara

    rule Ransomware_WannaCry {
        meta:
      ...
    }

    Rule Meta: The rule meta section allows for the definition of additional metadata for the rule. This metadata can include information about the rule's author, references, version, etc.

    Example:
    Code: yara

    rule Ransomware_WannaCry {
        meta:
            author = "Madhukar Raina"
            version = "1.0"
            description = "Simple rule to detect strings from WannaCry ransomware"
            reference = 	"https://www.virustotal.com/gui/file/ed01ebfbc9eb5bbea545af4d01bf5f1071661840480439c6e5babe8e080e41aa/behavior"
        ...
    }

    Rule Body: The rule body contains the patterns or indicators to be matched within the files. This is where the actual detection logic is defined.

    Example:
    Code: yara

    rule Ransomware_WannaCry {

        ...

        strings:
            $wannacry_payload_str1 = "tasksche.exe" fullword ascii
            $wannacry_payload_str2 = "www.iuqerfsodp9ifjaposdfjhgosurijfaewrwergwea.com" ascii
            $wannacry_payload_str3 = "mssecsvc.exe" fullword ascii

        ...

    }

    Rule Conditions: Rule conditions define the context or characteristics of the files to be matched. Conditions can be based on file properties, strings, or other indicators. Conditions are specified within the condition section.

    Example:
    Code: yara

    rule Ransomware_WannaCry {
        ...

        condition:
            all of them
    }

    In this YARA rule, the condition section simply states all of them, which means that all the strings defined in the rule must be present for the rule to trigger a match.

    Let us provide one more example of a condition which specifies that the file size of the analyzed file must be less than 100 kilobytes (KB).
    Code: yara

        condition:
            filesize < 100KB and (uint16(0) == 0x5A4D or uint16(0) == 0x4D5A)

    This condition also specifies that the first 2 bytes of the file must be either 0x5A4D (ASCII MZ) or 0x4D5A (ASCII ZM), by using uint16(0):
    Code: yara

    uint16(offset)

    Here's how uint16(0) works:
        uint16: This indicates the data type to be extracted, which is a 16-bit unsigned integer (2 bytes).
        (0): The value inside the parentheses represents the offset from where the extraction should start. In this case, 0 means the function will extract the 16-bit value starting from the beginning of the data being scanned. The condition uses uint16(0) to compare the first 2 bytes of the file with specific values.

It's important to note that YARA provides a flexible and extensible syntax, allowing for more advanced features and techniques such as modifiers, logical operators, and external modules. These features can enhance the expressiveness and effectiveness of YARA rules for specific detection scenarios.

Remember that YARA rules can be customized to suit our specific use cases and detection needs. Regular practice and experimentation will further enhance our understanding and proficiency with YARA rule creation. YARA documentation contain more details in depth.
Developing YARA Rules

In this section, we'll cover manual and automated YARA rule development.

Let's now navigate to the bottom of this section and click on "Click here to spawn the target system!". Then, let's SSH into the Target IP using the provided credentials. The vast majority of the actions/commands covered from this point up to end of this section can be replicated inside the target, offering a more comprehensive grasp of the topics presented.

Let's dive into the world of YARA rules using a sample named svchost.exe residing in the /home/htb-student/Samples/YARASigma directory of this section's target as an illustration. We want to understand the process behind crafting a YARA rule, so let's get our hands dirty.

Initially, we need to conduct a string analysis on our malware sample.
From the first few strings, it becomes evident that the file is packed using the UPX (Ultimate Packer for eXecutables) packer. Given this discovery, we can incorporate UPX-related strings to formulate a basic YARA rule targeting samples packed via UPX.
Here's a brief breakdown of our YARA rule crafted for detecting UPX-packed executables:

    Rule Name: UPX_packed_executable
    Meta Description: Provides a description of the rule, stating that it detects UPX-packed executables.
    Strings Section: strings defines the strings that the rule will search for within the files.
        $string_1 = "UPX0": Matches the string UPX0 within the file.
        $string_2 = "UPX1": Matches the string UPX1 within the file.
        $string_3 = "UPX2": Matches the string UPX2 within the file.
    Condition: condition specifies the criteria that must be met for the rule to trigger a match.
        all of them: Specifies that all the defined strings ($string_1, $string_2, and $string_3) must be found within the file.

In essence, our UPX_packed_executable rule (located inside this section's target at /home/htb-student/Rules/yara/upx_packed.yar) scans for the strings UPX0, UPX1, and UPX2 inside a file. If the rule finds all three strings, it raises an alert, hinting that the file might be packed with the UPX packer. This rule is a handy tool when we're on the lookout for executables that have undergone compression or obfuscation using the UPX method.
Developing a YARA Rule Through yarGen

Let's continue our dive into the world of YARA rules using a sample named dharma_sample.exe residing in the /home/htb-student/Samples/YARASigma directory of this section's target.

Once again, we need to conduct a string analysis on our malware sample.
After we execute the strings command on dharma_sample.exe, we spot C:\crysis\Release\PDB\payload.pdb, which is pretty unique. Alongside other distinct strings, we can craft a more refined YARA rule. Let's employ yarGen to expedite this process.

yarGen is our go-to tool when we need an automatic YARA rule generator. What makes it a gem is its ability to churn out YARA rules based on strings found in malicious files while sidestepping strings common in benign software. This is possible because yarGen comes equipped with a vast database of goodware strings and opcodes. Before diving in, we need to unpack the ZIP archives containing these databases.

Here's how we get yarGen up and running:

    Download the latest release from the release section
    Install all dependencies with pip install -r requirements.txt
    Run python yarGen.py --update to automatically download the built-in databases. They will be saved into the './dbs' subfolder (Download: 913 MB).
    See help with python yarGen.py --help for more information on the command line parameters.

Note: yarGen can be found inside the /home/htb-student/yarGen-0.23.4 directory of this section's target.

Let's place our sample in a temp directory (there is one available at /home/htb-student/temp inside this section's target) and specify the path using the following command-line arguments.
Command Breakdown:

    yarGen.py: This is the name of the yarGen Python script that will be executed.
    -m /home/htb-student/temp: This option specifies the source directory where the sample files (e.g., malware or suspicious files) are located. The script will analyze these samples to generate YARA rules.
    -o htb_sample.yar: This option indicates the output file name for the generated YARA rules. In this case, the YARA rules will be saved to a file named htb_sample.yar.

The resulting YARA rules will be written to the htb_sample.yar file inside the /home/htb-student/yarGen-0.23.4 directory of this section's target. Let's see the content of the generated rule.
Now, for the moment of truth. We'll unleash YARA with our newly minted rule to see if it sniffs out any matches when run against a malware sample repository located at home/htb-student/Samples/YARASigma inside this section's target.
Developing YARA Rules

Schlop@htb[/htb]$ yara htb_sample.yar /home/htb-student/Samples/YARASigma
dharma_sample /home/htb-student/Samples/YARASigma/dharma_sample.exe
dharma_sample /home/htb-student/Samples/YARASigma/pdf_reader.exe
dharma_sample /home/htb-student/Samples/YARASigma/microsoft.com
dharma_sample /home/htb-student/Samples/YARASigma/check_updates.exe
dharma_sample /home/htb-student/Samples/YARASigma/KB5027505.exe

As we can see, the pdf_reader.exe, microsoft.com, check_updates.exe, and KB5027505.exe files are detected by this rule (in addition to dharma_sample.exe of course).
Manually Developing a YARA Rule
Example 1: ZoxPNG RAT Used by APT17

Let's now go a bit deeper...

We want to develop a YARA rule to scan for a specific variation of the ZoxPNG RAT used by APT17 based on:

    A sample named legit.exe residing in the /home/htb-student/Samples/YARASigma directory of this section's target
    A post from Intezer
    String analysis
    Imphash
    Common sample file size

Let's start with our string analysis endeavors as follows.
Let's then use the hashes mentioned in Intezer's post to identify common sample sizes. It looks like there are no related samples whose size is bigger than 200KB. An example of an identified sample is the following. https://www.hybrid-analysis.com/sample/ee362a8161bd442073775363bf5fa1305abac2ce39b903d63df0d7121ba60550.

Finally, the sample's Imphash can be calculated as follows, using the imphash_calc.py script that resides in the /home/htb-student directory of this section's target.
Developing YARA Rules

Schlop@htb[/htb]$ python3 imphash_calc.py /home/htb-student/Samples/YARASigma/legit.exe
414bbd566b700ea021cfae3ad8f4d9b9

A good YARA rule to detect the aforementioned variation of ZoxPNG resides in the /home/htb-student/Rules/yara directory of this section's target, saved as apt_apt17_mal_sep17_2.yar.
YARA Rule Breakdown:

    Rule Imports: Modules are extensions to YARA's core functionality.
        import "pe": By importing the PE module the YARA rule gains access to a set of specialized functions and structures that can inspect and analyze the details of PE files. This makes the rule more precise when it comes to detecting characteristics in Windows executables.
    Rule Meta:
        description: Tells us the main purpose of the rule, which is to detect APT17 malware.
        license: Points to the location and version of the license governing the use of this YARA rule.
        author: The rule was written by Florian Roth from Nextron Systems.
        reference: Provides a link that goes into more detail about the malware or context of this rule.
        date: The date the rule was either created or last updated, in this case, 3rd October 2017.
        hash1, hash2, hash3: Hash values, probably of samples related to APT17, which the author used as references or as foundational data to create the rule.
    Rule Body: The rule contains a series of strings, which are potential indicators of the APT17 malware. These strings are split into two categories
        $x* strings
        $s* strings
    Rule Condition: This is the heart of the rule, where the actual detection logic resides.
        uint16(0) == 0x5a4d: Checks if the first two bytes of the file are MZ, which is the magic number for Windows executables. So, we're focusing on detecting Windows binaries.
        filesize < 200KB: Limits the rule to scan only small files, specifically those smaller than 200KB.
        pe.imphash() == "414bbd566b700ea021cfae3ad8f4d9b9": This checks the import hash (imphash) of the PE (Portable Executable) file. Imphashes are great for categorizing and clustering malware samples based on the libraries they import.
        1 of ($x*): At least one of the $x strings (from the strings section) must be present in the file.
        6 of them: Requires that at least six of the strings (from both $x and $s categories) be found within the scanned file.

Example 2: Neuron Used by Turla

We want to develop a YARA rule to scan for instances of Neuron Service used by Turla based on:

    A sample named Microsoft.Exchange.Service.exe residing in the /home/htb-student/Samples/YARASigma directory of this section's target
    An analysis report from the National Cyber Security Centre

Since the report mentions that both the Neuron client and Neuron service are written using the .NET framework we will perform .NET "reversing" instead of string analysis.

This can be done using the monodis tool as follows.


YARA Rule Breakdown:

    Strings Section:
        $class1 = "StorageUtils" ascii to $class8 = "W3WPDIAG" ascii: These are eight ASCII strings corresponding to class names within the .NET assembly.
        $func1 = "AddConfigAsString" ascii to $func7 = "FindSPath" ascii: These seven ASCII strings represent class or function names within the .NET assembly.
        $dotnetMagic = "BSJB" ascii: This signature is present in the CLI (Common Language Infrastructure) header of .NET binaries, and its presence can be used to indicate the file is a .NET assembly. Specifically, it's in the Signature field of the CLI header, which follows the PE header and additional tables.
    Condition Section:
        uint16(0) == 0x5A4D: This checks if the first two bytes at the start of the file are MZ, a magic number indicating a Windows Portable Executable (PE) format.
        uint16(uint32(0x3c)) == 0x4550: A two-step check. First, it reads a 32-bit (4 bytes) value from offset 0x3c of the file. In PE files, this offset typically contains a pointer to the PE header. It then checks whether the two bytes at that pointer are PE (0x4550), indicating a valid PE header. This ensures the file is a legitimate PE format and not a corrupted or obfuscated one.
        $dotnetMagic: Verifies the presence of the BSJB string. This signature is present in the CLI (Common Language Infrastructure) header of .NET binaries, and its presence can be used to indicate the file is a .NET assembly.
        6 of them: This condition states that at least six of the previously defined strings (either classes or functions) must be found within the file. This ensures that even if a few signatures are absent or have been modified, the rule will still trigger if a substantial number remain.

Example 3: Stonedrill Used in Shamoon 2.0 Attacks

We want to develop a YARA rule to scan for instances of Stonedrill used in Shamoon 2.0 attacks based on:

    A sample named sham2.exe residing in the /home/htb-student/Samples/YARASigma directory of this section's target
    An analysis report from Kaspersky

The report mentions: ... many samples had one additional encrypted resource with a specific, although non-unique name 101.

Encrypted/compressed/obfuscated in PE files usually means high entropy. We can use the entropy_pe_section.py script that resides in the /home/htb-student directory of this section's target to check if our sample's resource section contains anything encrypted/compressed as follows.

    Rule Imports: Modules are extensions to YARA's core functionality.
        import "pe": By importing the PE module the YARA rule gains access to a set of specialized functions and structures that can inspect and analyze the details of PE files. This makes the rule more precise when it comes to detecting characteristics in Windows executables.
        import "math": Imports the math module, providing mathematical functions like entropy calculations.
    Rule Meta:
        copyright = "Kaspersky Lab": The rule was authored or copyrighted by Kaspersky Lab.
        description = "Generic detection for samples that enumerate files with encrypted resource called 101": The rule aims to detect samples that list files and have an encrypted resource with the identifier "101".
        reference = "https://securelist.com/from-shamoon-to-stonedrill/77725/": Provides an URL for additional context or information about the rule.
        hash: Two hashes are given, probably as examples of known malicious files that match this rule.
        version = "1.4": The version number of the YARA rule.
    Strings Section:
        $mz = "This program cannot be run in DOS mode.": The ASCII string that typically appears in the DOS stub part of a PE file.
        $a1 = "FindFirstFile", $a2 = "FindNextFile": Strings for Windows API functions used to enumerate files. The usage of FindFirstFileW and FindNextFileW API functions can be idenfitied through string analysis.
        $a3 = "FindResource", $a4 = "LoadResource": As already mentioned Stonedrill samples feature encrypted resources. These strings can be found through string analysis and they are related to Windows API functions used for handling resources within the executable.
    Rule Condition:
        uint16(0) == 0x5A4D: Checks if the first two bytes of the file are "MZ," indicating a Windows PE file.
        all of them: All the strings $a1, $a2, $a3, $a4 must be present in the file.
        filesize < 700000: The file size must be less than 700,000 bytes.
        pe.number_of_sections > 4: The PE file must have more than four sections.
        pe.number_of_signatures == 0: The file must not be digitally signed.
        pe.number_of_resources > 1 and pe.number_of_resources < 15: The file must contain more than one but fewer than 15 resources.
        for any i in (0..pe.number_of_resources - 1): ( (math.entropy(pe.resources[i].offset, pe.resources[i].length) > 7.8) and pe.resources[i].id == 101 and pe.resources[i].length > 20000 and pe.resources[i].language == 0 and not ($mz in (pe.resources[i].offset..pe.resources[i].offset + pe.resources[i].length))): Go through each resource in the file and check if the entropy of the resource data is more than 7.8 and the resource identifier is 101 and the resource length is greater than 20,000 bytes and the language identifier of the resource is 0 and the DOS stub string is not present in the resource. It's not required for all resources to match the condition; only one resource meeting all the criteria is sufficient for the overall YARA rule to be a match.

YARA Rule Development Resources

As you can imagine, the best YARA rule development resource is the official documentation, which can be found at the following link.

The next best resource on effective YARA rule developement comes from Kaspersky.

Below are some blog posts that offer a more detailed explanation on how to use yarGen for YARA rule development:

    How to Write Simple but Sound Yara Rules - Part 1
    How to Write Simple but Sound Yara Rules - Part 2
    How to Write Simple but Sound Yara Rules - Part 3

yarGen is a great tool to develop some good yara rules by extracting unique patterns. Once the rule is developed with the help of yarGen, we definitely need to review and add/remove some more patterns to make it an effective rule.

In this blogpost, Florian Roth has mentioned that the main purpose of yarGen is to develop the best possible rules for manual post-processing which might sound like a tedious task, but the combination of clever automatic preselection and a critical human analyst beats both the fully manual and fully automatic generation process.

Continuing forward, we'll dig deeper into using YARA, expanding our hunt for threats from our filesystem to memory and also within memory images.
Hunting Evil with YARA (Windows Edition)

In this section, we'll explore using YARA on Windows systems for identifying threats both on disk and in memory.

Let's now navigate to the bottom of this section and click on "Click here to spawn the target system!". Then, let's RDP into the Target IP using the provided credentials. The vast majority of the actions/commands covered from this point up to end of this section can be replicated inside the target, offering a more comprehensive grasp of the topics presented.
Hunting for Malicious Executables on Disk with YARA

As we saw in the previous section, YARA is a potent weapon in the arsenal of cybersecurity professionals for detecting and hunting malicious executables on a disk. With custom YARA rules or established ones at our disposal, we can pinpoint suspicious or potentially malicious files based on distinct patterns, traits, or behaviors.

We will be using a sample that we analyzed previously named dharma_sample.exe residing in the C:\Samples\YARASigma directory of this section's target.

We'll first examine the malware sample inside a hex editor (HxD, located at C:\Program Files\HxD) to identify the previously discovered string C:\crysis\Release\PDB\payload.pdb.
If we scroll almost to the bottom, we will notice yet another seemingly unique sssssbsss string.

Hex editor displaying 'dharma_sample.exe' with hex values and decoded text. Highlighted section shows repeated 's' characters. Data inspector shows binary and character values.

Going forward, we will craft a rule grounded in these patterns and then utilize the YARA utility to scour the filesystem for similar executables.

Note: In a Linux machine the hexdump utility could have been used to identify the aforementioned hex bytes as follows.
We will be using a sample that we analyzed previously named htb_sample_shell.exe residing in the C:\Samples\YARASigma directory of this section's targe

htb_sample_shell.exe injects Metasploit's meterpreter shellcode into the cmdkey.exe process. Let's activate it, ensuring successful injection.

Note: Make sure you launch PowerShell as an administrator.


We're leveraging a concise PowerShell script. The Get-Process command fetches running processes, and with the help of the pipe symbol (|), this data funnels into the script block ({...}). Here, ForEach-Object dissects each process, prompting yara64.exe to apply our YARA rule on each process's memory.

Let's observe if the child process (PID 9084) gets flagged.

From the results, the meterpreter shellcode seems to have infiltrated a process with PID 9084. We can also guide the YARA scanner with a specific PID as follows.
PowerShell and Process Hacker windows showing shellcode analysis. Parent process is cmdkey.exe with PID 9084. Shellcode written at address 0x266b611000. YARA scan detects meterpreter reverse TCP shellcode.
Hunting for Evil Within ETW Data with YARA

In the module titled Windows Event Logs & Finding Evil we explored ETW and introduced SilkETW. In this section, we'll circle back to ETW data, highlighting how YARA can be used to filter or tag certain events.

A quick recap first. According to Microsoft, Event Tracing For Windows (ETW) is a general-purpose, high-speed tracing facility provided by the operating system. Using a buffering and logging mechanism implemented in the kernel, ETW provides a tracing mechanism for events raised by both user-mode applications and kernel-mode device drivers.

Diagram of ETW process: Controller enables/disables ETW collection, Event Trace Session with Buffer Pool logs events, Provider generates events, Consumer logs/analyzes events, and data flows to ETW Trace files.

    Controllers: Controllers possess functionalities that encompass initiating and terminating trace sessions. They also have the capability to enable or disable providers within a specific trace.
    Providers: Providers are crucial, as they generate events and channel them to the designated ETW sessions.
    Consumers: Consumers are the subscribers to specific events. They tap into these events and then receive them for in-depth processing or analysis.

Useful Providers

    Microsoft-Windows-Kernel-Process: This ETW provider is instrumental in monitoring process-related activity within the Windows kernel. It can aid in detecting unusual process behaviors such as process injection, process hollowing, and other tactics commonly used by malware and advanced persistent threats (APTs).
    Microsoft-Windows-Kernel-File: As the name suggests, this provider focuses on file-related operations. It can be employed for detection scenarios involving unauthorized file access, changes to critical system files, or suspicious file operations indicative of exfiltration or ransomware activity.
    Microsoft-Windows-Kernel-Network: This ETW provider offers visibility into network-related activity at the kernel level. It's especially useful in detecting network-based attacks such as data exfiltration, unauthorized network connections, and potential signs of command and control (C2) communication.
    Microsoft-Windows-SMBClient/SMBServer: These providers monitor Server Message Block (SMB) client and server activity, providing insights into file sharing and network communication. They can be used to detect unusual SMB traffic patterns, potentially indicating lateral movement or data exfiltration.
    Microsoft-Windows-DotNETRuntime: This provider focuses on .NET runtime events, making it ideal for identifying anomalies in .NET application execution, potential exploitation of .NET vulnerabilities, or malicious .NET assembly loading.
    OpenSSH: Monitoring the OpenSSH ETW provider can provide important insights into Secure Shell (SSH) connection attempts, successful and failed authentications, and potential brute force attacks.
    Microsoft-Windows-VPN-Client: This provider enables tracking of Virtual Private Network (VPN) client events. It can be useful for identifying unauthorized or suspicious VPN connections.
    Microsoft-Windows-PowerShell: This ETW provider tracks PowerShell execution and command activity, making it invaluable for detecting suspicious PowerShell usage, script block logging, and potential misuse or exploitation.
    Microsoft-Windows-Kernel-Registry: This provider monitors registry operations, making it useful for detection scenarios related to changes in registry keys, often associated with persistence mechanisms, malware installation, or system configuration changes.
    Microsoft-Windows-CodeIntegrity: This provider monitors code and driver integrity checks, which can be key in identifying attempts to load unsigned or malicious drivers or code.
    Microsoft-Antimalware-Service: This ETW provider can be employed to detect potential issues with the antimalware service, including disabled services, configuration changes, or potential evasion techniques employed by malware.
    WinRM: Monitoring the Windows Remote Management (WinRM) provider can reveal unauthorized or suspicious remote management activity, often indicative of lateral movement or remote command execution.
    Microsoft-Windows-TerminalServices-LocalSessionManager: This provider tracks local Terminal Services sessions, making it useful for detecting unauthorized or suspicious remote desktop activity.
    Microsoft-Windows-Security-Mitigations: This provider keeps tabs on the effectiveness and operations of security mitigations in place. It's essential for identifying potential bypass attempts of these security controls.
    Microsoft-Windows-DNS-Client: This ETW provider gives visibility into DNS client activity, which is crucial for detecting DNS-based attacks, including DNS tunneling or unusual DNS requests that may indicate C2 communication.
    Microsoft-Antimalware-Protection: This provider monitors the operations of antimalware protection mechanisms. It can be used to detect any issues with these mechanisms, such as disabled protection features, configuration changes, or signs of evasion techniques employed by malicious actors.

YARA Rule Scanning on ETW (Using SilkETW)

SilkETW is an open-source tool to work with Event Tracing for Windows (ETW) data. SilkETW provides enhanced visibility and analysis of Windows events for security monitoring, threat hunting, and incident response purposes. The best part of SilkETW is that it also has an option to integrate YARA rules. It includes YARA functionality to filter or tag event data.

SilkETW resides in the C:\Tools\SilkETW\v8\SilkETW directory of this section's target.
Command Breakdown:

    -t user: Specifies the event tracing mode. In this case, it is set to "user," indicating that the tool will trace user-mode events (events generated by user applications).
    -pn Microsoft-Windows-PowerShell: Specifies the name of the provider or event log that you want to trace. In this command, it targets events from the "Microsoft-Windows-PowerShell" provider, which is responsible for generating events related to PowerShell activity.
    -ot file: Specifies the output format for the collected event data. In this case, it is set to "file," meaning that the tool will save the event data to a file.
    -p ./etw_ps_logs.json: Specifies the output file path and filename. The tool will save the collected event data in JSON format to a file named "etw_ps_logs.json" in the current directory.
    -l verbose: Sets the logging level to "verbose." This option enables more detailed logging information during the event tracing and analysis process.
    -y C:\Rules\yara: Enables YARA scanning and specifies a path containing YARA rules. This option indicates that the tool will perform YARA scanning on the collected event data.
    -yo Matches: Specifies the YARA output option. In this case, it is set to "Matches," meaning that the tool will display YARA matches found during the scanning process.

Inside the C:\Rules\yara directory of this section's target there is a YARA rules file named etw_powershell_hello.yar that looks for certain strings in PowerShell script blocks.
Hunting Evil with YARA (Linux Edition)

Let's face the reality of cybersecurity operations: often, as Security Analysts, we don’t get the luxury of direct access to a potentially compromised system. Imagine, we've got suspicious flags waving from a remote machine, but due to organizational boundaries, permissions, or logistical issues, we just can't lay our hands on it. It feels like knowing there's a potential fire but not being able to see or touch it directly. This situation can be nerve-wracking, but it's a challenge we've learned to tackle.

Here's where things get interesting. Even if we can't access the machine, in many cases, a memory capture (or memory dump) from the suspicious system can be handed over to us in the Security Operations Center (SOC). It's akin to receiving a snapshot of everything happening in the system at a particular moment. And just because we have this snapshot, doesn't mean our hands are tied.

Luckily, our trusty tool YARA comes to the rescue. We can run YARA-based scans directly on these memory images. It's like having x-ray vision: we can peer into the state of the system, looking for signs of malicious activity or compromised indicators, all without ever having direct access to the machine itself. This capability not only enhances our investigative prowess but also ensures that even remote, inaccessible systems don't remain black boxes to us. So, while the direct path may be blocked, with tools like YARA and our expertise, we always find a way to shine a light into the shadows.
Hunting for Evil Within Memory Images with YARA

Incorporating YARA extends the capabilities of memory forensics, a pivotal technique in malware analysis and incident response. It equips us to traverse memory content, hunting for telltale signs or compromise indicators.

YARA's memory image scanning mirrors its disk-based counterpart. Let's map out the process:

    Create YARA Rules: Either develop bespoke YARA rules or lean on existing ones that target memory-based malware traits or dubious behaviors.
    Compile YARA Rules: Compile the YARA rules into a binary format using the yarac tool (YARA Compiler). This step creates a file containing the compiled YARA rules with a .yrc extension. This step is optional, as we can use the normal rules in text format as well. While it is possible to use YARA in its human-readable format, compiling the rules is a best practice when deploying YARA-based detection systems or working with a large number of rules to ensure optimal performance and effectiveness. Also, compiling rules provides some level of protection by converting them into binary format, making it harder for others to view the actual rule content.
    Obtain Memory Image: Capture a memory image using tools such as DumpIt, MemDump, Belkasoft RAM Capturer, Magnet RAM Capture, FTK Imager, and LiME (Linux Memory Extractor).
    Memory Image Scanning with YARA: Use the yara tool and the compiled YARA rules to scan the memory image for possible matches.

Let's now navigate to the bottom of this section and click on "Click here to spawn the target system!". Then, let's SSH into the Target IP using the provided credentials. The vast majority of the actions/commands covered from this point up to end of this section can be replicated inside the target, offering a more comprehensive grasp of the topics presented.

For instance, we have a memory snapshot named compromised_system.raw (residing in the /home/htb-student/MemoryDumps directory of this section's target) originating from a system under the siege of WannaCry ransomware. Let's confront this image with the wannacry_artifacts_memory.yar YARA rule (residing in the /home/htb-student/Rules/yara directory of this section's target).

Here's an example command for YARA-based memory scanning:

Beyond standalone tools, diving deeper into memory forensics offers a plethora of avenues. Integrating YARA within memory forensics frameworks amplifies its potential. With the Volatility framework and YARA operating in tandem, WannaCry-specific IOCs can be detected seamlessly.

The Volatility framework is a powerful open-source memory forensics tool used to analyze memory images from various operating systems. YARA can be integrated into the Volatility framework as a plugin called yarascan allowing for the application of YARA rules to memory analysis.

The Volatility framework is covered in detail inside HTB Academy's Introduction to Digital Forensics module.

For now, let's only discuss how YARA can be used as a plugin in the Volatility framework.
Single Pattern YARA Scanning Against a Memory Image

In this case, we'll specify a YARA rule pattern directly in the command-line which is searched within the memory image by the yarascan plugin of Volatility. The string should be enclosed in quotes (") after the -U option. This is useful when we have a specific YARA rule or pattern that we want to apply without creating a separate YARA rules file.

From previous analysis we know that WannaCry malware attempt to connect to the following hard-coded URI www.iuqerfsodp9ifjaposdfjhgosurijfaewrwergwea.com

Introducing this pattern within the command line using -U "www.iuqerfsodp9ifjaposdfjhgosurijfaewrwergwea.com" prompts a search within the compromised_system.raw memory image.


This option allows us to directly specify a YARA rule string within the command-line itself. Let's see how we can search for the content of a whole YARA rule file (i.e. .yar rule file) in memory image files.
Multiple YARA Rule Scanning Against a Memory Image

When we have multiple YARA rules or a set of complex rules that we want to apply to a memory image, we can use the -y option followed by the rule file path in the Volatility framework, which allows us to specify the path to a YARA rules file. The YARA rules file (wannacry_artifacts_memory.yar in our case) should contain one or more YARA rules in a separate file.

The YARA rules file we will use for demostration purposes is the following.

We can see in the results that the yarascan plugin in Volatility is able to find the process svchost.exe with PID 1576 in the memory image of the compromised system.

In summary, the -U option allows us to directly specify a YARA rule string within the command-line, while the -y option is used to specify the path to a file containing one or more YARA rules. The choice between the two options depends on our specific requirements and whether we have a single rule or a set of rules to apply during the analysis.
Hunting Evil with YARA (Web Edition)

Unpac.Me is tool tailored for malware unpacking. The great thing about Unpac.Me is that it grants us the capability to run our YARA rules over their amassed database of malware submissions. Considering the hurdles of gaining access to commercialized malware datasets, Unpac.Me emerges as a prime asset for those dedicated SOC analysts and persistent malware enthusiasts.
Hunting for Evil Within Online Datasets with YARA

Suppose we want to test out the following YARA rule.
So, how do we get started?

    Register for zero-cost access and hop into the platform.

    Head over to Yara Hunt and choose New Hunt. UnpacMe interface showing 'Yara Hunt' menu with options for 'New Hunt' and 'History'.

    Enter the YARA rule into the designated rule space. UnpacMe Yara Hunt interface displaying a YARA rule for detecting Dharma ransomware, authored by Madhukar Raina, with specific strings and conditions.

    First hit Validate and then Scan. Interface showing options for Scan Assist, Fast Scan, Store Offsets, File Size Limits, Validate, Scan, and Total Recall.

    Scan results get displayed right in front of our eyes. Taking a quick glance at our example, the system hustled through all malware submissions in a couple of minutes, spotting 1 match.

    Hunt Results showing ransomware_dharma rule with 1 unpacked malware match. Status: complete. Rule validation passed. Scan coverage: 100%. Observed lifespan: 3 years. First seen: 21/02/2020. Last seen: 13/06/2023. File type: EXE, size: 95 KB.

For individuals and organizations with limited resources, Unpac.Me and similar platforms can serve as stepping stones to enhance their malware analysis and detection capabilities, enabling them to make meaningful contributions to the field of cybersecurity.

Sigma and Sigma Rules

Sigma is a generic signature format used for describing detection rules for log analysis and SIEM systems. It allows SOC analysts to create and share rules that help identify specific patterns or behaviors indicative of security threats or malicious activities. Sigma rules are typically written in YAML format and can be used with various security tools and platforms.

SOC analysts use Sigma rules to define and detect security events by analyzing log data generated by various systems, such as firewalls, intrusion detection systems, and endpoint protection solutions. These rules can be customized to match specific use cases and can include conditions, filters, and other parameters to determine when an event should trigger an alert.

The main advantage of Sigma rules is their portability and compatibility with multiple SIEM and log analysis systems, enabling analysts to write rules once and use them across different platforms.

Sigma can be considered as standardized format for analysts to create and share detection rules. It helps in converting the IOCs into queries and can be easily integrated with security tools, including SIEM and EDRs. Sigma rules can be used to detect suspicious activities in various log sources. This also helps in building efficient processes for Detection as Code by automating the creation and deployment of detection rules.

Diagram showing Sigma Rule conversion using Uncoder.io or Sigma Converter to integrate with SIEM and EDR tools like ArcSight and Splunk.
Usages of Sigma

    Universal Log Analytics Tool: We can write detection rules once and then convert them to various SIEM and log analytics tool formats, sparing us the repetitive task of rewriting logic across different platforms.
    Community-driven Rule Sharing: With Sigma, we have the ability to tap into a community that regularly contributes and shares their detection rules. This ensures that we constantly update and refine our detection mechanisms.
    Incident Response: Sigma aids in incident response by enabling analysts to quickly search and analyze logs for specific patterns or indicators.
    Proactive Threat Hunting: We can use Sigma rules for proactive threat hunting sessions. By leveraging specific patterns, we can comb through our datasets to pinpoint anomalies or signs of adversarial activity.
    Seamless Integration with Automation Tools: By converting Sigma rules into appropriate formats, we can seamlessly integrate them with our SOAR platforms and other automation tools, enabling automated responses based on specific detections.
    Customization for Specific Environments: The flexibility of Sigma rules means that we can tailor them according to the unique characteristics of our environment. Custom rules can address the specific threats or scenarios we're concerned about.
    Gap Identification: By aligning our rule set with the broader community, we can perform gap analysis, identifying areas where our detection capabilities might need enhancement.

How Does Sigma Work?

At its heart, Sigma is about expressing patterns found in log events in a structured manner. So, instead of having a variety of rule descriptions scattered in various proprietary formats, with Sigma, we have a unified, open standard. This unified format becomes the lingua franca for log-based threat detection.

Sigma rules are written in YAML. Each Sigma rule describes a particular pattern of log events which might correlate with malicious activity. The rule encompasses a title, description, log source, and the pattern itself.

But here comes the magic. The true power of Sigma lies in its convertibility. We might ask, "If it's a standard format, how do we use it with our specific logging tools and platforms?" That's where the Sigma converter (sigmac) steps in. This converter is the linchpin of our workflow, transforming our Sigma rules into queries or configurations compatible with a multitude of SIEMs, log management solutions, and other security analytics tools.

With sigmac, we can take a rule written in the Sigma format and translate it for ElasticSearch, QRadar, Splunk, and many more, almost instantaneously.

Note: pySigma is increasingly becoming the go-to option for rule translation, as sigmac is now considered obsolete.
Sigma Rule Structure

As mentioned already, Sigma rule files are written in YAML format. Below is the structure of a Sigma rule.

Image showing a structure for a rule with fields: title, status, description, author, reference, logsource, detection, and condition. Required fields are highlighted.

Source: https://github.com/SigmaHQ/sigma/wiki/Specification

Let's understand the structure of a Sigma rule with an example.
Code: yaml

title: Potential LethalHTA Technique Execution
id: ed5d72a6-f8f4-479d-ba79-02f6a80d7471
status: test
description: Detects potential LethalHTA technique where "mshta.exe" is spawned by an "svchost.exe" process
references:
    - https://codewhitesec.blogspot.com/2018/07/lethalhta.html
author: Markus Neis
date: 2018/06/07
tags:
    - attack.defense_evasion
    - attack.t1218.005
logsource:
    category: process_creation
    product: windows
detection:
    selection:
        ParentImage|endswith: '\svchost.exe'
        Image|endswith: '\mshta.exe'
    condition: selection
falsepositives:
    - Unknown
level: high

The below screenshot shows the different components that form a Sigma Rule:

Image of a rule for detecting Potential LethalHTA Technique Execution. Includes title, unique ID, status, description, reference link, author Markus Neis, date 2018/06/07, tags for defense evasion and MITRE technique, logsource for process creation on Windows, detection criteria for svchost.exe and mshta.exe, unknown false positives, and high criticality level.

Sigma Rule Breakdown (based on Sigma's specification):

    title: A brief title for the rule that should contain what the rule is supposed to detect (max. 256 characters)

Code: yaml

title: Potential LethalHTA Technique Execution
...

    id: Sigma rules should be identified by a globally unique identifier in the id attribute. For this purpose randomly generated UUIDs (version 4) are recommended but not mandatory.

Code: yaml

title: Potential LethalHTA Technique Execution
id: ed5d72a6-f8f4-479d-ba79-02f6a80d7471
...

    status (optional): Declares the status of the rule.
        stable: The rule didn't produce any obvious false positives in multiple environments over a long period of time
        test: The rule doesn't show any obvious false positives on a limited set of test systems
        experimental: A new rule that hasn't been tested outside of lab environments and could lead to many false positives
        deprecated: The rule is to replace or cover another one. The link between rules is made via the related field.
        unsupported: The rule can not be used in its current state (special correlation log, home-made fields, etc.)

Code: yaml

title: Potential LethalHTA Technique Execution
id: ed5d72a6-f8f4-479d-ba79-02f6a80d7471
status: test
...

    description (optional): A short description of the rule and the malicious activity that can be detected (max. 65,535 characters)

Code: yaml

title: Potential LethalHTA Technique Execution
id: ed5d72a6-f8f4-479d-ba79-02f6a80d7471
status: test
description: Detects potential LethalHTA technique where "mshta.exe" is spawned by an "svchost.exe" process
...

    references (optional): Citations to the original source from which the rule was inspired. These might include blog posts, academic articles, presentations, or even tweets.

Code: yaml

title: Potential LethalHTA Technique Execution
id: ed5d72a6-f8f4-479d-ba79-02f6a80d7471
status: test
description: Detects potential LethalHTA technique where "mshta.exe" is spawned by an "svchost.exe" process
references:
    - https://codewhitesec.blogspot.com/2018/07/lethalhta.html
...

    author (optional): Creator of the rule (can be a name, nickname, twitter handle, etc).

Code: yaml

title: Potential LethalHTA Technique Execution
id: ed5d72a6-f8f4-479d-ba79-02f6a80d7471
status: test
description: Detects potential LethalHTA technique where "mshta.exe" is spawned by an "svchost.exe" process
references:
    - https://codewhitesec.blogspot.com/2018/07/lethalhta.html
author: Markus Neis
...

    date (optional): Rule creation date. Use the format YYYY/MM/DD.

Code: yaml

title: Potential LethalHTA Technique Execution
id: ed5d72a6-f8f4-479d-ba79-02f6a80d7471
status: test
description: Detects potential LethalHTA technique where "mshta.exe" is spawned by an "svchost.exe" process
references:
    - https://codewhitesec.blogspot.com/2018/07/lethalhta.html
author: Markus Neis
date: 2018/06/07
...

    logsource: This section describes the log data on which the detection is meant to be applied to. It describes the log source, the platform, the application and the type that is required in the detection. More information can be found in the following link: https://github.com/SigmaHQ/sigma/tree/master/documentation/logsource-guides

    It consists of three attributes that are evaluated automatically by the converters and an arbitrary number of optional elements. We recommend using a "definition" value when further explanation is necessary.
        category: The category value is used to select all log files written by a certain group of products, like firewalls or web server logs. The automatic converter will use the keyword as a selector for multiple indices. Examples: firewall, web, antivirus, etc.
        product: The product value is used to select all log outputs of a certain product, e.g. all Windows event log types including Security, System, Application and newer types like AppLocker and Windows Defender. Examples: windows, apache, check point fw1, etc.
        service: The service value is used to select only a subset of a product's logs, like the sshd on Linux or the Security event log on Windows systems. Examples: sshd, applocker, etc.

Code: yaml

title: Potential LethalHTA Technique Execution
id: ed5d72a6-f8f4-479d-ba79-02f6a80d7471
status: test
description: Detects potential LethalHTA technique where "mshta.exe" is spawned by an "svchost.exe" process
references:
    - https://codewhitesec.blogspot.com/2018/07/lethalhta.html
author: Markus Neis
date: 2018/06/07
logsource:
	category: process_creation
	product: windows
...

    detection: A set of search-identifiers that represent properties of searches on log data. Detection is made up of two components:
        Search Identifiers
        Condition

    Image showing detection attributes with search-identifiers for cmd.exe and powershell.exe, and parent images winword.exe, excel.exe, powerpnt.exe. Condition: selection1 AND selection2.

    Source: blusapphire.io

Code: yaml

title: Potential LethalHTA Technique Execution
id: ed5d72a6-f8f4-479d-ba79-02f6a80d7471
status: test
description: Detects potential LethalHTA technique where "mshta.exe" is spawned by an "svchost.exe" process
references:
    - https://codewhitesec.blogspot.com/2018/07/lethalhta.html
author: Markus Neis
date: 2018/06/07
logsource:
	category: process_creation
	product: windows
detection:
	selection:
		ParentImage|endswith: '\svchost.exe'
        Image|endswith: '\mshta.exe'
    condition: selection
...

The values contained in Sigma rules can be modified by value modifiers. Value modifiers are appended after the field name with a pipe character (|) as separator and can also be chained, e.g. fieldname|mod1|mod2: value. The value modifiers are applied in the given order to the value.

The behavior of search identifiers is changed by value modifiers as shown in the table below :
Value Modifier 	Explanation 	Example
contains 	Adds wildcard (*) characters around the value(s) 	CommandLine|contains
all 	Links all elements of a list with a logical "AND" (instead of the default "OR") 	CommandLine|contains|all
startswith 	Adds a wildcard (*) character at the end of the field value 	ParentImage|startswith
endswith 	Adds a wildcard (*) character at the begining of the field value 	Image|endswith
re: 	This value is handled as regular expression by backends 	CommandLine|re: '\[String\]\s*\$VerbosePreference

Source: blusapphire.io

Search identifiers include multiple values in two different data structures:

    Lists, which can contain:
        strings that are applied to the full log message and are linked with a logical OR.
        maps (see below). All map items of a list are linked with a logical OR.

    Image showing detection examples with lists and maps. Lists include cmd.exe, powershell.exe, winword.exe, excel.exe, powerpnt.exe. Maps include wmic.exe and command line containing '/node:'.

    Source: blusapphire.io

Example list of strings that matches on evilservice or svchost.exe -n evil.
Code: yaml

detection:
 	keywords:
		- evilservice
 		- svchost.exe -n evil

Example list of maps that matches on image file example.exe or on a executable whose description contains the string Test executable.
Code: yaml

detection:
	selection:
 		- Image|endswith: '\example.exe'
		- Description|contains: 'Test executable'

    Maps: Maps (or dictionaries) consist of key/value pairs, in which the key is a field in the log data and the value a string or integer value. All elements of a map are joined with a logical AND.

Example that matches on event log Security and (Event ID 517 or Event ID 1102)
Code: yaml

detection:
    selection:
  	    EventLog: Security
  	    EventID:
  	      - 517
     	  - 1102
	condition: selection

Example that matches on event log Security and Event ID 4679 and TicketOptions 0x40810000 and TicketEncryption 0x17.
Code: yaml

detection:
	selection:
		EventLog: Security
		EventID: 4769
		TicketOptions: '0x40810000'
		TicketEncryption: '0x17'
	condition: selection

    Condition: Condition defines how fields are related to each other. If there's anything to filter, it can be defined in the condition. It uses various operators to define relationships for multiple fields which are explained below.

Operator 	Example
Logical AND/OR 	keywords1 or keywords2
1/all of them 	all of them
1/all of search-identifier-pattern 	all of selection*
1/all of search-id-pattern 	all of filter_*
Negation with 'not' 	keywords and not filters
Brackets - Order of operation '()' 	selection1 and (keywords1 or keywords2)

Source: blusapphire.io

Example of a condition:
Code: yaml

condition: selection1 or selection2 or selection3

Sigma Rule Development Best Practices

Sigma's specification repository contains everything you may need around Sigma rules.

Sigma rule development best practices and common pitfalls can be found on Sigma's Rule Creation Guide.
Developing Sigma Rules

In this section, we'll cover manual Sigma rule development.

Let's now navigate to the bottom of this section and click on "Click here to spawn the target system!". Then, let's RDP into the Target IP using the provided credentials. The vast majority of the actions/commands covered from this point up to end of this section can be replicated inside the target, offering a more comprehensive grasp of the topics presented.
Manually Developing a Sigma Rule
Example 1: LSASS Credential Dumping

Let's dive into the world of Sigma rules using a sample named shell.exe (a renamed version of mimikatz) residing in the C:\Samples\YARASigma directory of this section's target as an illustration. We want to understand the process behind crafting a Sigma rule, so let's get our hands dirty.

After executing shell.exe as follows, we collected the most critical events and saved them as lab_events.evtx inside the C:\Events\YARASigma directory of this section's target.

The process created by shell.exe (mimikatz) will try to access the process memory of lsass.exe. The system monitoring tool Sysmon was running in the background and captured this activity in the event logs (Event ID 10).
First off, Sysmon Event ID 10 is triggered when a process accesses another process, and it logs the permission flags in the GrantedAccess field. This event log contains two important fields, TargetImage and GrantedAccess. In a typical LSASS memory dumping scenario, the malicious process needs specific permissions to access the memory space of the LSASS process. These permissions are often read/write access, among other things.

Sysmon event showing shell.exe accessing lsass.exe with granted access 0x1010.

Now, why is 0x1010 crucial here? This hexadecimal flag essentially combines PROCESS_VM_READ (0x0010) and PROCESS_QUERY_INFORMATION (0x0400) permissions. To translate that: the process is asking for read access to the virtual memory of LSASS and the ability to query certain information from the process. While 0x0410 is the most common GrantedAccess flag used for reading LSASS memory, 0x1010 implies both reading and querying information from the process and is also frequently observed during credential dumping attacks.

So how can we weaponize this information for detection? Well, in our security monitoring stack, we would configure Sysmon to flag or alert on any Event ID 10 where the TargetImage is lsass.exe and GrantedAccess is set to 0x1010.

A Sigma rule that checks for the abovementioned conditions can be found below.
Sigma Rule Breakdown

    title: This title offers a concise overview of the rule's objective, specifically aimed at detecting interactions with LSASS memory involving a particular access flag.

Code: yaml

title: LSASS Access with rare GrantedAccess flag

    status: This field signals that the rule is in the testing phase, suggesting that additional fine-tuning or validation may be necessary.

Code: yaml

status: experimental

    description: Rule description.

Code: yaml

description: This rule will detect when a process tries to access LSASS memory with suspicious access flag 0x1010

    date: This field marks the date when the rule was either updated or originally created.

Code: yaml

date: 2023/07/08

    tags: The rule is tagged with attack.credential_access and attack.t1003.001. These tags help categorize the rule based on known attack techniques or tactics related to credential access.

Code: yaml

tags:
	- attack.credential_access
	- attack.t1003.001`

    logsource: The logsource specifies the log source that the rule is intended to analyze. It contains category as process_access which indicates that the rule focuses on log events related to process access (Sysmon Event ID 10, if we use Sigma's default config files). Also, product: windows specifies that the rule is specifically designed for Windows operating systems.

Code: yaml

logsource:
	category: process_access
	product: windows

    detection: The detection section defines the conditions that must be met for the rule to trigger an alert. The selection part specifies the criteria for selecting relevant log events where the TargetImage field ends with \lsass.exe and GrantedAccess field ends with the hexadecimal value 0x1010. The GrantedAccess field represents the access rights or permissions associated with the process. In this case, it targets events with a specific access flag of 0x1010. Finally, the condition part specifies that the selection criteria must be met for the rule to trigger an alert. In this case, both the TargetImage and GrantedAccess criteria must be met.

Code: yaml

detection:
	selection:
        TargetImage|endswith: '\lsass.exe'
        GrantedAccess|endswith: '0x1010'
    condition: selection

Οur first Sigma rule above can be found inside the C:\Rules\sigma directory of this section's target as proc_access_win_lsass_access.yml. Let's explore the sigmac tool that can help us transform this rule into queries or configurations compatible with a multitude of SIEMs, log management solutions, and other security analytics tools.

The sigmac tool can be found inside the C:\Tools\sigma-0.21\tools directory of this section's target.

Suppose that we wanted to convert our Sigma rule into a PowerShell (Get-WinEvent) query. This could have been accomplished with the help of sigmac as follows.
Let's adjust the Get-WinEvent query above by specifying the .evtx file that is related to LSASS access by another process (lab_events.evtx inside the C:\Events\YARASigma directory of this section's target) and see if it will identify the Sysmon event (ID 10) that we analyzed at the beginning of this section.

Note: Please open a PowerShell terminal as administrator to run the query.

The related Sysmon event with ID 10 is successfully identified!

But let's not stop there - remember, false positives are the enemy of effective security monitoring.

    We should also cross-reference the SourceImage (the process initiating the access) against a list of known, safe processes that commonly interact with LSASS.
    If we see an unfamiliar or unusual process trying to read LSASS with a GrantedAccess that ends with 10, 30, 50, 70, 90, B0, D0, F0, 18, 38, 58, 78, 98, B8, D8, F8, 1A, 3A, 5A, 7A, 9A, BA, DA, FA, 0x14C2, and FF (these suffixes come from studying the GrantedAccess values that various LSASS credential dumping techniques require), that's a red flag, and our incident response protocol should kick in.
    Especially, if the SourceImage resides in suspicious paths containing, \Temp\, \Users\Public\, \PerfLogs\, \AppData\, \htb\ etc. that's another red flag, and our incident response protocol should kick in.

A more robust version of the Sigma rule we created taking the above points into consideration can be found inside the C:\Rules\sigma directory of this section's target as proc_access_win_lsass_access_robust.yml
Notice how the condition filters out false positives (selection and not 1 of filter_optional_*).
Example 2: Multiple Failed Logins From Single Source (Based on Event 4776)

According to Microsoft, Event 4776 generates every time that a credential validation occurs using NTLM authentication.

This event occurs only on the computer that is authoritative for the provided credentials. For domain accounts, the domain controller is authoritative. For local accounts, the local computer is authoritative.

It shows successful and unsuccessful credential validation attempts.

It shows only the computer name (Source Workstation) from which the authentication attempt was performed (authentication source). For example, if you authenticate from CLIENT-1 to SERVER-1 using a domain account you'll see CLIENT-1 in the Source Workstation field. Information about the destination computer (SERVER-1) isn't presented in this event.

If a credential validation attempt fails, you'll see a Failure event with Error Code parameter value not equal to 0x0.

lab_events_2.evtx inside the C:\Events\YARASigma directory of this section's target contains events related to multiple failed login attempts against NOUSER (thanks to mdecrevoisier).

Event 4776 in Windows security auditing showing credential validation attempt with error code 0xC0000064 for account NOUSER on workstation FS01.

Event 4776 in Windows security auditing showing credential validation attempt for user NOUSER on workstation FS01 with error code 0xC0000064.

A valid Sigma rule to detect multiple failed login attempts originating from the same source can be found inside the C:\Rules\sigma directory of this section's target, saved as win_security_susp_failed_logons_single_source2.yml

    logsource: This section specifies that the rule is intended for Windows systems (product: windows) and focuses only on Security event logs (service: security).

Code: yaml

logsource:
    product: windows
    service: security

    detection: selection2 is essentially the filter. It's looking for logs with EventID 4776 (EventID: 4776) regardless of the TargetUserName or Workstation values (TargetUserName: '*', Workstation: '*'). condition counts instances of TargetUserName grouped by Workstation and checks if a workstation has more than three failed login attempts.


    Page 9
    Hunting Evil with Sigma (Chainsaw Edition)

Hunting Evil with Sigma (Chainsaw Edition)

In cybersecurity, time is of the essence. Rapid analysis allows us to not just identify but also respond to threats before they escalate.

When we're up against the clock, racing to find a needle in a haystack of Windows Event Logs without access to a SIEM, Sigma rules combined with tools like Chainsaw and Zircolite are our best allies.

Both tools allow us to use Sigma rules to scan not just one, but multiple EVTX files concurrently, offering a broader and more comprehensive scan in a very efficient manner.

Let's now navigate to the bottom of this section and click on "Click here to spawn the target system!". Then, let's RDP into the Target IP using the provided credentials. The vast majority of the actions/commands covered from this point up to end of this section can be replicated inside the target, offering a more comprehensive grasp of the topics presented.
Scanning Windows Event Logs With Chainsaw

Chainsaw is a freely available tool designed to swiftly pinpoint security threats within Windows Event Logs. This tool enables efficient keyword-based event log searches and is equipped with integrated support for Sigma detection rules as well as custom Chainsaw rules. Therefore, it serves as a valuable asset for validating our Sigma rules by applying them to actual event logs. Let's download the Chainsaw from the official Github repository and run it with some sigma rules:

Chainsaw can be found inside the C:\Tools\chainsaw directory of this section's target.

Let's first run Chainsaw with -h flag to see the help menu.
Example 1: Hunting for Multiple Failed Logins From Single Source With Sigma

Let's put Chainsaw to work by applying our most recent Sigma rule, win_security_susp_failed_logons_single_source2.yml (available at C:\Rules\sigma), to lab_events_2.evtx (available at C:\Events\YARASigma\lab_events_2.evtx) that contains multiple failed login attempts from the same source.
Our Sigma rule was able to identify the multiple failed login attempts against NOUSER.

Using the -s parameter, we can specify a directory containing Sigma detection rules (or one Sigma detection rule) and Chainsaw will automatically load, convert and run these rules against the provided event logs. The mapping file (specified through the --mapping parameter) tells Chainsaw which fields in the event logs to use for rule matching.
Example 2: Hunting for Abnormal PowerShell Command Line Size With Sigma (Based on Event ID 4688)

Firstly, let's set the stage by recognizing that PowerShell, being a highly flexible scripting language, is an attractive target for attackers. Its deep integration with Windows APIs and .NET Framework makes it an ideal candidate for a variety of post-exploitation activities.

To conceal their actions, attackers utilize complex encoding layers or misuse cmdlets for purposes they weren't designed for. This leads to abnormally long PowerShell commands that often incorporate Base64 encoding, string merging, and several variables containing fragmented parts of the command.

A Sigma rule that can detect abnormally long PowerShell command lines can be found inside the C:\Rules\sigma directory of this section's target, saved as proc_creation_win_powershell_abnormal_commandline_size.yml.


    detection: The selection section checks if any Windows events with ID 4688 exist and also checks if the NewProcessName field ends with \powershell.exe, \pwsh.exe, or \cmd.exe. The selection_powershell section checks if the executed command line includes PowerShell-related executables and finally, the selection_length section checks if the CommandLine field of the 4688 event contains 1,000 characters or more. The condition section checks if the selection criteria inside the selection, selection_powershell, and selection_length sections are all met.

Let's put Chainsaw to work by applying the abovementioned Sigma rule, proc_creation_win_powershell_abnormal_commandline_size.yml (available at C:\Rules\sigma), to lab_events_3.evtx (available at C:\Events\YARASigma\lab_events_3.evtx, thanks to mdecrevoisier) that contains 4688 events with abnormally long PowerShell commands.
Our Sigma doesn't seem to be able to identify the abnormally long PowerShell commands within these 4688 events.

Does this mean that our Sigma rule is flawed? No! As discussed previously, Chainsaw's mapping file (specified through the --mapping parameter) tells it which fields in the event logs to use for rule matching.

It looks like the NewProcessName field was missing from the sigma-event-logs-all.yml mapping file.

We introduced the NewProcessName field into a sigma-event-logs-all-new.yml mapping file inside the C:\Tools\chainsaw\mappings directory of this section's target.

Let's run Chainsaw again with this new mapping file.
Our Sigma rule successfully uncovered all three abnormally long PowerShell commands that exist inside lab_events_3.evtx

Remember that configuration when it comes to using or tranlating Sigma rules is of paramount importance!


    Page 10
    Hunting Evil with Sigma (Splunk Edition)

Hunting Evil with Sigma (Splunk Edition)

As discussed when introducing Sigma, Sigma rules revolutionize our approach to log analysis and threat detection. What we're dealing with here is a sort of Rosetta Stone for SIEM systems. Sigma is like a universal translator that brings in a level of abstraction to event logs, taking away the painful element of SIEM-specific query languages.

Let's validate this assertion by converting two Sigma rules into their corresponding SPL formats and examining the outcomes.
Example 1: Hunting for MiniDump Function Abuse to Dump LSASS's Memory (comsvcs.dll via rundll32)

A Sigma rule named proc_access_win_lsass_dump_comsvcs_dll.yml can be found inside the C:\Tools\chainsaw\sigma\rules\windows\process_access directory of the previous section's target.

This Sigma rule detects adversaries leveraging the MiniDump export function of comsvcs.dll via rundll32 to perform a memory dump from LSASS.

We can translate this rule into a Splunk search with sigmac (available at C:\Tools\sigma-0.21\tools) as follows.
Hunting Evil with Sigma (Splunk Edition)

PS C:\Tools\sigma-0.21\tools> python sigmac -t splunk C:\Tools\chainsaw\sigma\rules\windows\process_access\proc_access_win_lsass_dump_comsvcs_dll.yml -c .\config\splunk-windows.yml
(TargetImage="*\\lsass.exe" SourceImage="C:\\Windows\\System32\\rundll32.exe" CallTrace="*comsvcs.dll*")

Let's now navigate to the bottom of this section and click on Click here to spawn the target system!. Then, let's navigate to http://[Target IP]:8000, open the "Search & Reporting" application, and submit the Splunk search sigmac provided us with.
The Splunk search provided by sigmac was indeed able to detect MiniDump function abuse to dump LSASS's memory.
Example 2: Hunting for Notepad Spawning Suspicious Child Process

A Sigma rule named proc_creation_win_notepad_susp_child.yml can be found inside the C:\Rules\sigma directory of the previous section's target.

This Sigma rule detects notepad.exe spawning a suspicious child process.

We can translate this rule into a Splunk search with sigmac (available at C:\Tools\sigma-0.21\tools) as follows.
Let's now navigate to the bottom of this section and click on Click here to spawn the target system!, if we haven't done that already. Then, let's navigate to http://[Target IP]:8000, open the "Search & Reporting" application, and submit the Splunk search sigmac provided us with.
The Splunk search provided by sigmac was indeed able to detect notepad.exe spawning suspicious processes (such as PowerShell).

Please note that more frequently than not you will have to tamper with Sigma's config files (available inside the C:\Tools\sigma-0.21\tools\config directory of the previous section's target) in order for the SIEM queries to be readily usable.
In this skills assessment section, we'll practice YARA rule development and using Sigma rules to hunt for threats within event logs.

For the initial question, you'll be tasked with developing a YARA rule aimed at identifying the malicious Seatbelt.exe file, commonly used by attackers for maintaining operational security.

In the subsequent question, you'll be using a Sigma rule to identify instances of shadow volume deletion - a technique often utilized by ransomware groups.
